## Conclusion

The military government saw the issue of "pro-Japanese" police as a distraction from the real reforms and progress needed. While some CIC officers in Korea had only recently arrived from the American Philippine colony where they took their investigations of treason very seriously in a reversed colonial context, in Korea it was not national loyalty but a vague and selective conception of democracy that was the priority, which could sometimes leave the most enthusiastic supporters of reform bewildered. In Japan police reforms were the target of a concerted and radical project of reform in Japan, which were themselves by no means a success, but which brought about a decline in reported police violence among police officers - including some returning from service in Korea - that shared a history of torture and brutality. The educational efforts in Korea, seen through the efforts of advisors and the calls by contributors to the *Democratic Police* which called for transformation rather than treason trials, had no more effect than decades of open condemnations of torture found both in the United States and in the Japanese Empire up to 1945. This is not to say the reformers were wrong to ignore the nationalist calls for a complete purge of a tainted and treasonous police, indeed, in some ways this continues to distract historians today. The historical context is essential, and both the colonial legacy and the Cold War tactics that brought wartime enemies and postwar anti-Communists into alliance are an important part of the story. However, the police reforms in southern Korea failed to eliminate practices like torture for most of the reasons attempts at reform usually fail in transitional states, all the more under the circumstances of a foreign occupation and deep political polarization.

In a retrospective article on his experience in Korea former police Advisor and Military Government director of the Department of Police Col. William H. Maglin began by recounting a personal encounter with the brutality of the Korean police. In February, 1946 a Korean man was discovered illegally cutting down trees near Maglin's billet on the outskirts of Seoul by some visitors. They took him to a nearby police box. The police officer there assured Maglin's visitors and a "house boy" that accompanied them that he would take care of the prisoner, who he immediately hit hard enough to knock him down. When Maglin heard about the encounter, he drove out to confront the police officer.

>The policeman was quite surprised at my taking exception to his action. Upon my query as to whether he had been in the police under the Japanese, he replied that he had joined only two months before, after graduating from the Police Academy which we had established.[^60]

As Maglin goes on to explain, this contributed to his conviction that the problem of reforming the Korean police had little to do with identifying "pro-Japanese" police, or purging all police who had served in the colonial period. For Maglin, as for many of the others who participated in the "Democratic Police" educational efforts, there was a genuine faith in the ability to remold the human material which made up the police force. As was the case in both police and other reform efforts in occupation Korea and Japan, however, when success fell short of initial ambitious goals, the obvious explanations for failure might be overlooked and replaced instead with a cultural and racial explanation. In Maglin's case, there was no admission of responsibility for the brutal institution he left behind in 1947. There was no recognition that the resources and commitment to police education and professionalisation required—as already evidenced by the experience of reforms in the United States—were never provided in a southern Korea facing a far more volatile political environment than either Japan or the U.S. Nor was there any real accounting of the repeated claims that cases of torture and brutality were in fact being investigated at a time when all indications showed that police violence and oppression had become one of the most critical sources of distrust and dissent among the people. Instead Maglin assures the reader that, "considering Orient police psychology," the Korean National Police was a "disciplined and controlled force."[^61] 


*Draft1-2013.6  
This is an incomplete draft but feel free to share.  
Draft updates and files at:* [http://huginn.net/articles/kjp]([http://huginn.net/articles/kjp)


[^60]: William H. Maglin, "The Korean National Police", *Military Police* 1 (1999): 67-68.

[^61]: *Ibid.*, 69.
