% Treason, Torture, and U.S Police Reforms in the Aftermath of Japanese Empire
% Konrad M. Lawson
% 23 June 2013

**Abstract:** *From late 1945 to 1948, the United States occupation forces in southern Korea built a new Korean National Police force composed of a nucleus of officers with experience from the Japanese colonial period and thousands of new recruits. Involving dozens of U.S. police advisers and designed to create a "democratic police," the failure of the effort had devastating consequences. Focusing on the enduring practice of police torture, this article builds on previous scholarship that emphasizes the importance of the Japanese colonial legacy and Cold War politics by placing the reform efforts in the context of broader American police reforms dating back to the 1930s, and comparing them with the mixed results of U.S. "democratic police" reforms in occupation Japan. While early postwar Korean critics saw the brutality of the police and the widespread hatred of them as tied to their pro-Japanese past, U.S. occupation authorities and police advisers alike remained committed to the idea that both the Korean and Japanese police forces could be remade into a disciplined institution for protecting democracy with only a minimal purge and educational programs.*

Police torture is one of the most important symbols of modern Korean history.[^5] The most striking exhibits on display for young school children and other visitors to Sŏdaemun Prison History Hall (서대문형무소 역사관) or the Independence Hall of Korea (독립기념관) are those depicting, in elaborate detail, the torture of Korean independence activists during the Japanese colonial period (1910-1945). No film or television show set in the years under Japanese rule is complete without at least one scene showing the brutality of the Japanese police and their Korean collaborators. There are many other evils of Japanese imperialism, including its wartime system of sexual slavery and its assimilation policies but none of them have been so frequently used to depict the opposition between a virtuous and resisting victim and a heartless and brutal colonial overlord.

Unlike equivalent scenes of wartime Gestapo torture in Western Europe or the United States, however, these images of Japanese torture found in the media, in novels, in textbooks, and in histories in South Korea have an added element of unnerving proximity.[^2] The practice of police torture did not come to an end with Japanese surrender but continued and thrived under the authoritarian regimes of the postwar period, without significant decline until at least the 1980s.[^3] Even today, isolated cases continue to be reported despite the fact that police interrogations are filmed.[^4] 

This kind of eerie familiarity created when a more distant oppression inadvertently invokes a more recent past is not unique, of course, to South Korea, but a more common feature of transitional societies, even ones which, like South Korea, have passed through several distinct periods of political violence and repression. The way in which this has been framed and remembered in the Korean case, however, is something more particular. Police torture in South Korea from 1945 into the 1980s and beyond is rarely portrayed as conforming to a common or general feature of authoritarian governments, or of regimes that have attempted and failed a transition to democracy. Instead, both during the course of transition in the years of American military government from 1945-1948, and by historians since, the practice of police torture has been described in terms of a poisonous inheritance; a Japanese colonial legacy (일제잔재) which has both a physical manifestation, in the form of thousands of Korean police veterans who continued to serve after Japanese surrender, and a violent cultural one in the form of their brutal practices of torture and repression. 

To support this, few studies of the Korean police in the postwar fail to mention one or two of the statistics from the minutes of a 1946 conference where the first U.S. director of the Korean National Police, Colonel William H. Maglin, admits that the vast majority of Lieutenants (83%), Inspectors (83%), Provincial Chiefs (80%), and a majority of all ranks above patrolman had served during the colonial period. More than half of all Korean police who served during the colonial period, some 5,000 in number, formed the core of the around 25,000 police in U.S. occupied southern Korea as of November, 1946.[^6]

Though sometimes not made explicit, the suggestion appears to be that all Korean police who served in the colonial period are tainted individuals who should have all been purged by the U.S. military government and denied positions in the new Korean National Police. These officers are usually described as tainted in two ways: First, they are described as pro-Japanese police (친일경찰) guilty of the crime of treason for serving in Japan's primary institution of repression. This treasonous nature of the Korean National Police becomes all the more solidified when, in June, 1949, their forces launched a raid on the offices of the Special Investigative Committee that directed the investigation, arrest, and trial of Koreans accused of collaboration with the Japanese Empire, which very soon lead to the collapse of the entire process. Secondly, having worked within the infamous Japanese police, these officers were either themselves directly guilty of acts of brutality, or at the very least were trained and worked in an environment where torture and brutality were widespread.

The result was a police force which carried on the repression already suffered by the Korean people for over three decades of Japanese rule. As Gregory Henderson puts it, “the cloth of which the system was cut remained the old, colonial cloth, the methods also the same. Hence it was the character of the Japanese colonial system and attitude toward human rights that dominated the situation, not the old, indigenous Korean system, not the aims of the independence movement or the ideas or reforms of the incoming Americans.”[^1] Though the torture of suspects, petitioners, and even friendly witnesses was a standard judicial practice in pre-colonial Chosŏn under the Ming Code, the claim here is that the postwar saw the persistence of a particular modern Japanese form of cruelty in the postwar period.[^7] 

If the failure to purge colonial period police was the first and most damning failure of the incoming American military government when it began to take control of the southern half of the Korean peninsula in September, 1945, then historians have expanded the indictment to at least two other significant failures.[^9] First, the Americans actively dismantled and repressed the often spontaneously formed local committees that might have formed an alternative nucleus for postwar security forces even as it failed to fill the vacuum with sufficient numbers of its own forces. Secondly, once the torture practices, widespread brutality, and political bias of the new Korean National Police became obvious to everyone, the U.S. Military Government in Korea (USAMGIK) not only failed to reform the institution and replace its leaders, but surrendered an ever increasing amount of power to it as priorities shifted to preserving South Korea from a Communist takeover. 

The failures of American police reforms in Korea were, indeed, devastating in their consequences. These failures are responsible for the long tenure of torture in postwar South Korea, the resilience of authoritarian governments there, and are at least partly to blame for the horrible massacres perpetrated, mostly, by Korean police forces in the opening months of the Korean war.[^8] However, this article argues that the dominant framing of these failures as a combination of postcolonial poison and the result of the sinister pragmatics of American Cold War strategy, both of which certainly played a role, under-appreciates several other important, if more mundane, problems that are common to many attempts to reform security institutions in transition, especially in the context of a foreign occupation. 

In other words, the failures of U.S. police reforms are worth considering not only as part of a specifically American imperial story of "modernizing repression" as described in the pioneering comparative work on U.S. police training by Jeremy Kuzmarov, but as one particularly tragic example of the costs of failure to reign in the violent excesses of one of the most important institutions for any political transition.[^10] However, just as the Korean case is worth considering as an example of a more global twentieth century challenge there is also much to be gained from deepening our understanding of the context in which failed reforms took place. To do this, this article will emphasize that just as the colonial legacy of torture was important to understanding postwar failures in Korea, so too we must appreciate the relative novelty of eradicating torture from the American perspective, as the process was still very much an ongoing one in the United States. Secondly, while there were important differences, this article will also show that some of the failures of U.S. police reforms in Korea should be seen in connection to similar efforts being carried out in Japan. Though officials on the ground quickly recognized the very real differences between the two, there were broader assumptions and policies that help explain the shortcomings that emerged in both cases, if with far worse consequences in Korea.

[^1]: Gregory Henderson, “Human Rights in South Korea 1945-1953” William Shaw ed., *Human Rights in Korea*, 133.

[^2]: Of course, this is equally true in North Korea, but this article will focus on the persistence of police torture in South Korea and the reform efforts of the United States there.

[^3]: On the hints of decline but continued importance of police torture in the 1980s see Jerome A. Cohen and Edward J. Baker "U.S. Foreign Policy and Human Rights in Korea" in William Shaw ed., *Human Rights in Korea: Historical and Policy Perspectives* (Harvard Univ Asia Center, 1991), 200-203. See also Silchʻŏn Kajok Undong Hyŏbŭihoe 민주화실천가족운동협의회, *『나의 손발을 묶는다 해도』* [Even if you tie my hands and feet] (Seoul: Kŏrŭm, 1987) and Wŏn-sun Pak, 『야만시대의기록』 [Record of a Barbarous Age], 3 vols., vol. 3 (Seoul: Yŏksa Pipʻyŏngsa, 2006). South Korea did not formally accede to the United Nations convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment until 1996 and the National Human Rights Commission, which has a mandate to independently investigate accusations of torture was not established until 2001.

[^4]: The most significant recent case, brought forward by the National Human Rights Commission was the 2010 revelation of torture by police officers at Seoul's Yangchŏn Police Station. See "Rights watchdog says torture still widespread in police custody" Accessed March 10, 2013 http://english.yonhapnews.co.kr/national/2010/06/16/76/0302000000AEN20100616005200315F.HTML

[^5]: This article makes a distinction between *police brutality* which may refer to all forms of illegitimate violence committed by police officers, including random acts of cruelty, excessive violence in the act of apprehending suspects, or in the process of suppressing protests, for example, and *police torture*, which is used to refer to an instrumental brutality most often employed in order to secure information or a suspect's confession. See Budimir Babović, "Police Brutality and Police Torture", in *Police in Transition: Essays on the Police Forces in Transition Countries*, ed by. Andras Kadar (Central European Univ Pr, 2001), 231–237.


[^6]: Bruce Cumings assembled these statistics in a table that is frequently cited. Bruce Cumings, *The Origins of the Korean War*, vol. 1, 2 vols. (Seoul, Korea: Yuksabipyungsa, 2002), 166. A copy of the minutes cited by Cumings in the table may correspond to a file that can be found in the James H. Hausman Papers. "Report of the Joint Korean-American Conference" "Organization of National Police of Korea" HQ USAFIK Office of the Military Governor Bureau of Police. James H. Hausman Papers, Box 26. It lists the figure of 5,000 out of 8,000 colonial period Japanese police as being on the postwar force, but I can't locate the percentages of each rank. One example of a recent reference to these statistics can be found in Jeremy Kuzmarov, *Modernizing Repression: Police Training and Nation Building in the American Century* (Univ of Massachusetts Pr, 2012), 82.



[^7]: William Shaw, *Legal Norms in a Confucian State* (Berkeley, Calif: Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Center for Korean Studies, 1981), 89.


[^8]: see, for example, Dong-Choon Kim, "The Long Road Toward Truth and Reconciliation", *Critical Asian Studies* 42, no. 4 (2010): 525–552 and Kijin Kim, 『한국전쟁과 집단학살』 [The Korean War and Mass Killings] (Seoul: Pŭrŭn yŏksa, 2005).




[^9]: Important critical work on the history of the Korean police, in the English language, includes Cumings *The Origins of the Korean War*, Kuzmarov *Modernizing Repression*, Jinwung Kim, "Participating in Nation-Building: The Role of the Military Government Police in South Korean Politics, 1946-1948", *Journal of American-East Asian Relations* 17, no. 2 (2010): 174–198. Byongook Moon and Merry Morash, "Policing in South Korea: Struggle, Challenge, and Reform", in *Policing Developing Democracies*, ed by. Mercedes S. Hinton and Tim Newburn (Taylor & Francis US, 2009): 101-119.

[^10]: Kuzmarov argues that abuses recipients of American training were an "extenstion of domestic practice" in the United States, and that "The police programs ultimately exemplify the dangers of social engineering efforts by the United States and the hidden and coercive aspects of American power."  Kuzmarov *Modernizing Repression*, 6, 13.

