## The Legacy of Police Torture in the United States

Many of the political and economic reform projects that were the highlight of the early American occupation experience in Japan, and to a significantly less extent in southern Korea, were not driven so much by enduring American ideals of democracy and equality as expressions of a particular historical moment. Both civilian and military officers working with American military occupations of the early postwar period were given an opportunity to experiment with New Deal political and social reformism in an environment that offered, at least initially, far fewer constraints than those found in the United States.[^dower] 

This is also true of efforts to reform and restructure the police forces in both Japan and in southern Korea after 1945 into a "democratic police" force. Significant efforts to create a professionalised police force, a "scientific" police force, and one which no longer represented a corrupt institution of repression and torture were all very recent developments in the United States, and no police advisor sent to Japan or Korea during the occupation could claim to have spent a career in American police forces that were not still in the grips of the very reforms now being called for in the aftermath of Japanese empire. Key among them was the need to eliminate the practice of police torture. Torture, especially in the forms of whipping, beating, and sleep deprivation over the course of several days, were widespread means of extracting confessions in many departments around the United States at least until the 1930s.[^widespread] Other forms of "clean" torture that were easy to deny, including the use of electricity and forcing the victim to remain in painful positions were also already in use in early twentieth century United States.[^clean]

Accusations of police torture could be found in the American press long before there were major efforts at reform, though this was also true that claims of police torture could be found in reporting on Japanese trials from the late nineteenth century on. Moreover, the law on the legality of confessions extracted by means of torture had long been well established. The 1897 Supreme Court ruling in *Bram vs. United States* ruled that confessions, "must not be extracted by any sort of threats or violence" and the 1924 *Ziang Sung Wan vs. United States* ruled that sleep deprivation, the most widely practised form of police torture, also invalidated a confession.[^cases] 

The true moment of national recognition that police torture was not simply an issue of isolated abuses but an American disease, however, came somewhat unexpectedly in the form the 1931, "Report on Lawlessness in Law Enforcement." The devastating indictment of police misconduct was part of a series of commissioned reports that became known as the Wickersham Commission. The report, whose authors Zechariah Chaffee Jr., Walter H. Pollak, and Carl S. Stern were all deeply committed to civil liberties, investigated the details of police torture and other coercive practices in over a dozen cities and built upon the rich evidence from case histories in which torture was conceded by the court.[^wickauthors] The report offered a stark and sobering conclusion never seen in a government sanctioned investigation, "the third degree, that is, the use of physical brutality, or other forms of cruelty, to obtain involuntary confessions or admissions, is widespread."[^wick] 

It is tempting to see the Wickersham Commission as the defining moment in the decline of police torture in the United States. Instead, it might be better seen as the opening blow of a longer and overdetermined process that was still far from complete by the time American police advisers made their way to Korea and Japan. Other developments include important court cases such as *Brown vs. Mississippi* in 1937 in which the Supreme Court ruled to overturn the conviction of three African-American men in a particularly brutal case of police torture.[^brown] Richard Leo has argued that the significant decline in police torture in the 1930s and 1940s might also be owed to the fact that new police interrogation manuals, with the first coming out in 1940, strongly discouraged the use of the "third degree." 

Also, leading police reformers such as August Vollmer and O. W. Wilson, as well as the head of the new Federal Bureau of Investigation, J. Edgar Hoover, set the barbaric and backward looking practices of police torture in contrast with the more modern and scientific methods of criminal investigation that would secure convictions on solid evidence.[^science] The federal crime laboratory established in 1932, the rise in popularity of the lie detector test and experimentation in truth serums from the late 1920s were part of a longer trend towards shifting a police dependence on fallible and often uncooperative human intelligence sources towards a focus on methods that reformers believed could turn lies into truth and to other forms of evidence that could offer "objective" certainty.[^trend] Though the unreliable results of lie detector tests were recognized as problematic from the start, as science editor for the *New York Times* Waldemar Kaempffert put it in 1944, it was, "better than the brutalities of the third degree. At least it gives the police something to think about and follow up for more evidence."[^13]

Both university-based and professional academies emerged to provide training for a new generation of professionalised police officers. August Vollmer had established a police school already in 1908 but his educational efforts received greater attention with police courses offered at the University of Chicago from 1929 and with his appointment as the first professor of police administration at the University of California in 1931.[^1908] The FBI Police Training School was created in 1935, directly inspired by the call for professionalisation in the Wickersham Commission, and was later expanded training to support wartime espionage.[^fbi] In that same year, Michigan State University founded a five year degree training program for police that would not only remain one of the leading criminology departments in the United States today, but train many of the leading police administrators who would make their way to Korea and Japan in the early postwar period. Among its first three graduates was Arthur F. Brandstatter, tasked with reorganizing the police in southern Korea in late 1945.

The decline in overt brutality in the interrogation room was a halting and gradual process, however. In 1937 two professors of political science at Syracuse University published a remarkable attempt to gauge perceptions of what constituted permissible degrees of "third degree" pressure in the *Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology*. Through a survey of 150 individuals, divided equally between New York State Troopers, "citizens" and prisoners, the study attempted to measure support for various specific interrogation techniques ranging from trickery to torture on a scale from -0.5 to +9.5, with the latter corresponding to torture resulting in death. In the survey, some 48% of troopers condoned face slapping to obtain confessions and 8% thought that beating a suspect to the point of rendering them unconscious was acceptable. Some 14% approved of delivering a "sample" of threatened violence, in the form of a punch to the body or face. Finally, some 54% of troopers approved of relay interrogation that denied sleep or rest to suspects for a period of three days and nights, a form of dangerous physical torture the seriousness of which is often under-appreciated.[^survey] 

There is no reason to believe this survey accurately reflects what state troopers, or for that matter, police officers in major metropolitan areas of the United States actually believed was permissible. Neither does the survey give us any indication of the actual prevalence of the kinds of acts described in the survey though, only a few months before the article came out, Pennsylvania State Trooper Stacey Gunderman was convicted of second degree murder for his role in beating a suspect to death during interrogation.[^12] The results of the survey were used in the article to recommend, bizarrely, that guidelines for coercive interrogation practices be relaxed slightly in accordance with a marked broader tolerance for coercive techniques in the three populations studied. The broader support for coercive methods of interrogation can be found echoed by Roscoe Pound, Dean of Harvard Law School and one of the members of the Wickersham Commission writing in 1934, "No amount of thundering against the third degree and its derivatives and analogues will achieve anything...Indeed, a feeling that the public are with them is largely behind the boldness with which high-handed, secret, extra-legal interrogations of persons held *incommunicado* are constantly carried on."[^14] The mere exposure of widely practised police torture in the Wickersham Commission, and the significant momentum behind police reform programs, could not expect to transform a police culture that facilitated physical torture within a few short years.

Indeed, by the late 1940s, brutal cases of police torture as a means of interrogation in the United States continued to be reported, though the practice most resilient when used against minorities.[^1940s] Even as physical blows became less welcome in the interrogation room, relay interrogation and sleep deprivation became the most common form of police torture to find mention in major trials related to the issue.[^latercases] Cases of direct physical beatings during interrogation continue to pop up until at least the 1960s, but the growing focus on psychological tactics of interrogation and deception, especially following the landmark *Miranda v. Arizona* case of 1966 that formalized the "Miranda rights" process of informing suspects of their rights in questioning, shifted the concern of reformers to less physical injustices within the interrogation process and the criminal justice system as a whole.[^psych]

The police torture deemed so widespread by the Wickersham Commission in the early 1930s targeted regular criminal suspects, whether they were accused of murder or less serious crimes. Though the large-scale violence of the era of prohibition certainly generated a feeling of helplessness among law enforcement officers, there was no particular emphasis or attempted justification for the violence based on the supposed existential threat to the nation seen in the wake of the Red scare of the 1920s. Torture was not defended as a last-resort measure to defuse a ticking bomb, as it has been by the United States in recent years, or to avert an imminent revolution, but was merely a way of accomplishing the otherwise challenging work of regular police duty.[^1] Despite the thorough militarisation of society, this was generally true within Japan too. As in the United States, the wide practice of police torture was condemned both in law, by politicians, and within the Justice and Home ministries, even when revolutionary subversives were among its primary victims. 

[^survey]: Herman C. Beyle and Spencer Parratt, "Approval and Disapproval of Specific Third Degree Practices", *Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1931-1951)* 28, no. 4 (November 1, 1937): 535, 537.

[^dower]: John W. Dower, *Embracing defeat: Japan in the wake of World War II*, (New York: W.W. Norton & Co./New Press, 1999), 26. See also Theodore Cohen, *Remaking Japan: the American Occupation as New Deal* (New York: Free Press, 1987).

[^clean]: Darius Rejali, *Torture and Democracy* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009), 70-73. 

[^widespread]: Richard A Leo, *Police Interrogation and American Justice* (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 2008), 44. 

[^brown]: *Brown v. Mississippi*, 297 U.S. 278, (1936).

[^cases]: For a list of many of the cases which took up the issue of police torture or "third degree" treatment up to the 1930s, see "The Third Degree", *Harvard Law Review* 43, no. 4 (February 1, 1930): 617–623, and Edwin R. Keedy, "The Third Degree and Legal Interrogation of Suspects", *University of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register* 85, no. 8 (June 1, 1937): 761–777.

[^wick]: United States. Wickersham Commission "Report on Lawlessness in Law Enforcement" (1931) @@@Confirm-page-number.

[^wickauthors]: Michael Grossberg, *The Cambridge History of Law in America*, vol. 3, 3 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 208.

[^science]: Leo *Police Interrogation*, 44-51. See also Nathan Douthit, "August Vollmer, Berkeley’s First Chief of Police, and the Emergence of Police Professionalism", *California Historical Quarterly* 54, no. 2 (July 1, 1975): 101–124 and August Vollmer, "The Scientific Policeman", *The American Journal of Police Science* 1, no. 1 (January 1, 1930): 8–12.

[^trend]: On the late nineteenth century roots of this transformation in Europe see Clive Emsley, *Crime, Police, and Penal Policy: European Experiences 1750-1940* (Oxford University Press, USA, 2007), 182-199. On the rise of new forms of interrogation see Leo *Police Interrogation*, 86-90. The popularity of what Alfred McCoy has termed "exotic" interrogation techniques involving drugs and mind control peaks in various CIA programs of the 1950s. See Alfred McCoy, *A Question of Torture: CIA Interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror*, Reprint. (Holt Paperbacks, 2006), 21-59.
 

[^1908]: Douthit "August Vollmer", 106-107. Arthur F. Brandstatter, "A History of Police Education in the United States", Accessed February 23, 2013 http://www.cj.msu.edu/~history/scrap/abhistoryofpoliceed.pdf

[^fbi]: "The National Academy" Accessed February 13, 2013. http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/training/national-academy 

[^1940s]: For examples of cases in the 1940s, especially against minorities see Monrad G. Paulsen, "The Fourteenth Amendment and the Third Degree", *Stanford Law Review* 6, no. 3 (May 1, 1954): 412–419. 

[^latercases]: Example cases from 1940s alone include *Chambers v. Florida* 309 U.S. 227 (1940), *Ashcraft v. Tennessee* 322 U.S. 143 (1944), *Malinski v. New York* 324 U.S. 401 (1945), *Refoule v. Ellis* N.D. Ga. (1947), and *Watts v. Indiana* 338 U.S. 49 (1949).

 [^psych]: This informs the bulk of discussion in Leo *Police Interrogation*.

[^11]: For more on the breadth of its use see G. Daniel Lassiter, *Interrogations, Confessions, and Entrapment* (New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2006), 39-57.



[^12]: "TROOPER IS GUILTY IN FATAL BEATING; Pennsylvania Jury Gives Second Degree Verdict in the Slaying of Hotel Keeper" *New York Times* Feb 26, 1937, 46.

[^13]: "Record in Court of the Lie Detector, Which Has Been Now Used in Over 2,500 Cases" *New York Times* (Feb 27, 1944), E9.

[^14]: Roscoe Pound, "Legal Interrogation of Persons Accused or Suspected of Crime", *Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1931-1951)* 24, no. 6 (March 1934): @@@Check-Page-Number 1014. Emphasis in original.

